# Introduction to the Java Programming Language

#Java #programming-language #JVM #software #multi-threading #OOP #strongly-typed #compiled-language #interpreted-language 

## A Strong-Typed, Objected-Oriented Programming Standard
You must have heard the **extreme boilerplate** Java has:
```Java 
// EntryPoint.Java
class EntryPoint{
	public static void main(String[] args){
		System.out.println("Hello World!");
	}
}
```
This maybe overwhelming, but everything that seems boilerplate conforms to the concept of strong typing and object-oriented programming:
- `class EntryPoint`: Everything is a class, and the entry point to the application makes no exception. Nonetheless, you can name `EntryPoint` to any name you'd like, because for starting to execute a Java program, the #compiler only need the line below.
- `public static void main(String[] args)`: This essentially tells the compiler that the application starts here, with the following reasons:
	- `public` exposes this method to the public, ensuring ensures the #JVM (Java Virtual Machine) can locate the `main` method to initiate the program.
	- `static` allows the `main` method to be called **without an object instance**, making it suitable for program startup.
	- `void` reflects the purpose of the `main` method, which is to execute program logic rather than returning a value.
	- Parameter `String[] args` provides a way to accept input arguments from the command line.
## Executing a Basic Java File
To execute this program, the OG way is through #CLI (Command-Line Interface):
```bash
# Compile to bytecode
javac EntryPoint.java

# JVM executes the bytecode
java EntryPoint

# output
Hello World!
```
Unfortunately no one uses this now, because the IDEs like Eclipse and Intellij IDEA does all the things for us.

Notice that there are 2 commands we need to run: `javac` and `java`. `javac` is the compiler, compiling the original .java file to .class file called #bytecode which is more compact, platform independent and can be interpreted by the #JVM. The `java` command uses the JVM (platform dependent) to execute that bytecode.

## Java Language Features
### OOP
Refer to [[Concept]].

### Multi-Threading
The Java language provides built-in multithreading support, allowing developers to easily write multithreaded programs:
```java
public class MultithreadingExample {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // 创建两个线程
        Thread thread1 = new Thread(() -> {
            // 模拟耗时操作
            try {
                Thread.sleep(1000);
            } catch (InterruptedException e) {
                e.printStackTrace();
            }
            System.out.println("Thread 1 Execution Complete.");
        });
        Thread thread2 = new Thread(() -> {
            // 模拟耗时操作
            try {
                Thread.sleep(2000);
            } catch (InterruptedException e) {
                e.printStackTrace();
            }
            System.out.println("Thread 2 Execution Complete.");
        });

        // 启动两个线程
        thread1.start();
        thread2.start();
    }
}
```

### Fault Tolerance
The use of Exceptions and custom Exceptions ensures that the program throws/handles the right error when things go wrong.
```java
// ExceptionHandlingExample.java
public class ExceptionHandlingExample {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        try {
            // 模拟可能发生错误的操作
            int result = 10 / 0;
        } catch (ArithmeticException e) {
            // 处理除法运算错误
            System.err.println("Division Exception：" + e.getMessage());
        }
    }
}
```

### Security
- **Access permission modifiers** (e.g., `public`, `private`, `protected`) control who can access specific code or data within a class. 
- Java prevents programs from **directly accessing OS** resources, reducing the risk of malicious code exploiting vulnerabilities.
- The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) **verifies bytecode for potential security threats** before execution.
```java
public class AccessControlExample {
    private String name;
    
    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }
    public void setName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        AccessControlExample example = new AccessControlExample();

        // 可以直接访问 public 属性
        example.setName("John Doe");

        // 无法直接访问 private 属性
        // example.name = "Jane Doe"; // 编译错误

        // 可以通过 public 方法访问 private 属性
        String name = example.getName();
    }
}
```

### JVM
The JVM is a software program that acts as a virtual machine. It's essentially an environment that executes Java bytecode, a special instruction set designed to be platform-neutral.

**The Compiled Part: Bytecode**

- When you write Java code, it's first compiled into bytecode using a #compiler like `javac`.
- This bytecode is not machine code specific to any operating system. It's **a set of instructions that the JVM understands**.
- Compiling to bytecode provides several benefits:
    - **Platform Independence:** The same bytecode can run on any system with a JVM installed, making Java "Write Once, Run Anywhere."
    - **Efficiency:** Bytecode is **a more compact representation than source code**, reducing file size.

**The Interpreted Part: JVM Execution**

- The bytecode doesn't directly interact with the underlying hardware.
- The JVM #interpreter interprets the bytecode instruction by instruction, translating it into machine code specific to the host system.
- This interpretation happens at runtime, when the program is actually being executed.

**JIT Compiler (Just-In-Time) for Performance**

- While interpretation offers flexibility, it can introduce some overhead. To improve performance, the JVM often employs a Just-In-Time (JIT) compiler.
- The JIT compiler analyzes frequently used bytecode sections and compiles them into native machine code during runtime.
- This compiled machine code executes much faster than interpreted bytecode, enhancing performance for critical parts of the program.

**In essence, Java code goes through a two-step process:**

1. **Compile Time:** Source code is converted into platform-independent bytecode.
2. **Runtime:** The JVM interprets the bytecode, using the JIT compiler to enhance performance with native machine code generation.

This combined approach gives Java the advantages of both compiled and interpreted languages:

- **Portability and Flexibility (Compiled Bytecode):** Runs on various platforms with a JVM.
- **Efficiency (JIT Compilation):** Achieves performance close to native applications for frequently executed code sections.

## Language Domains

Java's versatility shines across a broad spectrum of development domains. Here's a glimpse into some of its popular playgrounds:

- **Enterprise #backend Application:** Java's robust architecture, security features, and mature libraries make it a mainstay in building large-scale, mission-critical enterprise applications. From banking and finance to healthcare and telecommunications, Java powers business-crucial systems worldwide.
    
- **Web Development:** Java isn't just for back-end systems! Technologies like Java Server Pages (JSP) and frameworks like Spring enable developers to create dynamic web applications that interact with databases and provide a seamless user experience.
    
- **Android Development:** Java is the bedrock of Android app development. If you've ever used an Android phone, you've interacted with Java code! The Android SDK (Software Development Kit) provides the tools to build those engaging and functional mobile apps.
    
- **Big Data and Analytics:** Java's ability to handle large datasets efficiently makes it a popular choice for big data processing and analytics. Frameworks like Apache **Hadoop** and **Spark** leverage Java's strengths to crunch massive datasets and extract valuable insights.
    
- **Embedded Systems:** Java's adaptability extends to resource-constrained environments. A subset of Java, known as Java ME (Micro Edition), is specifically designed for developing applications for devices like smart cards, set-top boxes, and even some industrial robots.
    
- **Scientific Computing:** Java's rich ecosystem of scientific libraries like Apache Commons Math and Java Numerical Math Library (JNA) empowers developers to tackle complex scientific computations and simulations.
    

This is just a taste of the vast landscape where Java thrives. Its flexibility, vast developer community, and abundance of resources make it a powerful tool for building a wide range of applications.